[Pitch] Strongly typed regex captures (#35)
apple/swift-experimental-string-processing: Documentation/Evolution/StronglyTypedCaptures.md

  forthcoming result builder DSL.
- New language features which this design may require.

This focus of this pitch is the structural properties of capture types and how
regular expression patterns compose to form new capture types. The semantics of
string matching, its effect on the capture types (i.e. `UnicodeScalarView` or
`Substring`), or the matching API will be discussed in a separate pitch.

For background on Declarative String Processing, see related topics:
- [Declarative String Processing Overview](https://forums.swift.org/t/declarative-string-processing-overview/52459)
- [Regular Expression Literals](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-regular-expression-literals/52820)
- [Character Classes for String Processing](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-character-classes-for-string-processing/52920)

## Motivation

Across a variety of programming languages, many established regular expression
libraries present captures as a collection of captured content to the caller
upon a successful match
[[1](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/nsregularexpression)][[2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.text.regularexpressions.capture)].

> However, to know the structure of captured contents, programmers often need to
> read the regular expression, which may be a literal or a series of API calls, or
> run the regular expression on some input to find out. Because regular

Reviewer: I found this sentence a little hard to parse. Maybe:
```suggestion
However, to know the structure of captured contents, programmers often need to
carefully read the regular expression or run the regular expression on some
input to find out. Because regular
```

let graphemeBreakRange = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)\.\.([0-9a-fA-F]+)/
// => `Regex<(Substring, Substring)>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let graphemeBreakRange = Regex {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//         ".."
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     }
//     // `.Captures == (Substring, Substring)`
```

#### Named Capturing Group

A named capturing group in a pattern with multiple captures causes the resulting
tuple to have a tuple element label at the corresponding capture type position.
When the pattern has only one capture, there will be no tuple element label
because there are no 1-element tuples.

```
pattern ::= '(' '?' '<' name '>' pattern ')'
```

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /(?<lower>[0-9A-F]+)\.\.[0-9A-F]+/
// => `Regex<Substring>`

let graphemeBreakRange = /(?<lower>[0-9A-F]+)\.\.(?<upper>[0-9A-F]+)/
// => `Regex<(lower: Substring, upper: Substring)>`
```

#### Non-capturing Group

A non-capturing group's capture type is the capture type of its underlying pattern.

```
pattern ::= '(' '?' ':' pattern ')'
```

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /([0-9A-F]+)(?:\.\.([0-9A-F]+))?/

> // => `Regex<Void>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// => `Regex<(Substring, Substring?)>`
```

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let graphemeBreakLowerBound = Regex {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//         Optionally {
//             ".."
//             OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//         }
//     }
//     // `.Captures == (Substring, Substring?)`
```

#### Nested capturing group

When capturing group is nested within another capturing group, they count as two
distinct captures in the order their left parenthesis first appears in the
regular expression literal. This is consistent with PCRE and allows us to use
backreferences (e.g. `\2`) with linear indices.

```swift
let graphemeBreakPropertyData = /(([0-9A-F]+)(\.\.([0-9A-F]+)))\s*;\s(\w+).*/

> // Positions in capture tuple: 0 ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~    4 ^~~~~

Reviewer 2: In PCRE, capture group indices start from 1, `\0` (or `$0` when substituting) refers to the whole match.
```swift
let graphemeBreakPropertyData = /(([0-9A-F]+)(\.\.([0-9A-F]+)))\s*;\s(\w+).*/
// Positions in capture tuple:  2 ^~~~~~~~~~~   4 ^~~~~~~~~~~      5 ^~~~~
//                                         3 ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
//                             1 ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

The result builder DSL equivalent is missing a `.capture()`:
```swift
//     let graphemeBreakPropertyData = Regex {
//         Regex {
//             OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture() // (2)
//             Regex {
//                 ".."
//                 OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture() // (4)
//             }.capture() // (3)
//         }.capture() // (1)
//         Repeat(CharacterClass.whitespace)
//         ";"
//         CharacterClass.whitespace
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.word).capture() // (5)
//         Repeat(CharacterClass.any)
//     }
```

Reviewer: Ya, in what we've laid out here there will be an inconsistency between back reference numbering `\1` and tuple number `.0`. I don't think it's as intuitive for new users, but we could always include the whole match in the capture type and put it at position `0` to align with PCRE.

Reviewer: @natecook1000 and I have been talking about this. In the current draft the match algorithm is implicitly conceptualized as:

```swift
extension String {
  func match<R: RegexProtocol>(_ regex: R) -> (match: Substring, captures: R.Captures)?
}
```

If we flattened the captures into the resulting tuple, then the index based access would align with the backreference numbering:

```swift
// longhand spelling
extension String {
  func match<R: RegexProtocol>(_ regex: R) -> (match: Substring)? where R.Captures == Void
  func match<R: RegexProtocol, C0>(_ regex: R) -> (match: Substring, C0)? where R.Captures == C0
  func match<R: RegexProtocol, C0, C1>(_ regex: R) -> (match: Substring, C0, C1)? where R.Captures == (C0, C1)
  ...
}

// variadic generics spelling
extension String {
  func match<R: RegexProtocol, T...>(_ regex: R) -> (match: Substring, T...)? where R.Captures == (T...)
}
```

The main avenue I see this foreclosing is returning a richer type than a tuple from `match` that we can hang additional operations off of.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for the internal discussion. A flattened match+captures tuple is what I thought of too initially. As for "returning a richer type", I guess it could still be done. With ~~variadic generics~~ tuple splatting spelling
```swift
struct Match<Captures> {
  let captures: (Substring, Captures...)
  var match: Substring { captures.0 }
}
```
You would be able to access the full match by either using `.match` or `.captures.0`. Without tuple splatting, you could either declare types on the lines of
```swift
struct Match0 {
  let captures: Substring
  var match: Substring { captures }
}
struct Match1<C1> {
  let captures: (Substring, C1)
  var match: Substring { captures.0 }
}
struct Match2<C1, C2> {
  let captures: (Substring, C1, C2)
  var match: Substring { captures.0 }
}
...

// longhand spelling
extension String {
  func match<R: RegexProtocol>(_ regex: R) -> Match0? where R.Captures == Void
  func match<R: RegexProtocol, C1>(_ regex: R) -> Match1<C1>? where R.Captures == C1
  func match<R: RegexProtocol, C1, C2>(_ regex: R) -> Match2<C1, C2>? where R.Captures == (C1, C2)
  ...
}
```
Or, more concisely, declare a provisional `Match_` type having `(Substring, T...)` as its generic parameter:
```swift
// Captures == (Substring, T...)
struct Match_<Captures> {
  let captures: Captures
  var match: Substring { /* unsafely point to `captures.0` and bound it to `Substring` */ }
}

// longhand spelling
extension String {
  func match<R: RegexProtocol>(_ regex: R) -> Match_<Substring>? where R.Captures == Void
  func match<R: RegexProtocol, C1>(_ regex: R) -> Match_<(Substring, C1)>? where R.Captures == C1
  func match<R: RegexProtocol, C1, C2>(_ regex: R) -> Match_<(Substring, C1, C2)>? where R.Captures == (C1, C2)
  ...
}
```
I expect the `Match_` type to not have public initializers, so it's safe to assume that its generic parameter will always be a tuple (or directly `Substring`) having `Substring` as its first element.

Reviewer: Ya, actually as I mention below with `Alternation` we can even add `@dynamicMemberLookup` to the `Match` type to allow referencing captures by index or name directly. The only thing we'd lose with a nominal type is tuple destructuring... which isn't nothing.

I don't think we want the "match" to be part of the captures generic type, because when we get around the result builder syntax it won't compose as well.

So maybe it could look something like:

```swift
@dynamicMemberLookup
struct Match<Captures...> {
  let _storage: (Substring, Captures...)
  let match: Substring
  let captures: (Captures...)

  subscript<Value>(dynamicMember keyPath: KeyPath<(Substring, Captures...), Value>) -> Value {
    _storage[keyPath: keyPath]
  }
}

extension String {
  func match<R: RegexProtocol>(_ regex: R) -> Match<R.Captures>?
}
```

This would allow you to index on the match type where `0` is the match and `1` is the first capture which aligns with PCRE syntax. It would also allow you to name based access. And you could read `captures` if you wanted to use tuple de-structuring. The only weird thing is that once you access `captures`, the indices on the tuple will have shifted down by one.

Reviewer 2: With `@dynamicMemberLookup`, a captured group labeled `match` would conflict with the `Match` property named `match`. In that regard, `.captures` seems unavoidable.

//                                         2 ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
//                              1 ^~~~~~~~~~~   3 ^~~~~~~~~~~
// => `Regex<(Substring, Substring, Substring, Substring, Substring)>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let graphemeBreakPropertyData = Regex {
//         Regex {
//             OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture() // (1)
//             Regex {
//                 ".."
//                 OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture() // (3)
//             }.capture() // (2)
//         }.capture() // (0)
//         Repeat(CharacterClass.whitespace)
//         ";"
//         CharacterClass.whitespace
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.word).capture() // (4)
//         Repeat(CharacterClass.any)
//     }
//     // `.Captures == Regex(Substring, Substring, Substring, Substring, Substring)`

let input = "007F..009F    ; Control # Cc  [33] <control-007F>..<control-009F>"
// Match result for `input`:
// ("007F..009F", "007F", "..009F", "009F", "Control")
```

#### Quantification

> A quantifier's capture type depends on its underlying pattern.

Reviewer 3: Should we note that this is a big difference from most implementations, where you only have access to the last match of a repeated capture group?

Reviewer 3: For example, Python only gives you access to the last group of this dash-separated string:

```python
rep = re.compile('(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+')
match = rep.match("1234-5678-9abc-def0")
print(match.group(1))
# Prints "def0"
```

Whereas the proposed version will provide access to all four sub-matches:

```swift
// Note: Syntax / API still in discussion
let pattern = /(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+/
if let match = "1234-5678-9abc-def0".firstMatch(of: pattern) {
    print(match.captures)
}
// Prints ["1234", "5678", "9abc", "def0"]
```

//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`

/([0-9a-fA-F]+){3,5}/
// => `Regex<[Substring]>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Repeat(3...5) {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     )
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`

/([0-9a-fA-F]+){3,}/
// => `Regex<[Substring]>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Repeat(3...) {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     )
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`
```

Note:
- For quantifiers that produce an array, it is arguable that a lazy collection
  based on matched ranges could minimize reference counting operations on
  `Substring` and reduce allocations. However, array in capture types would make
  a much cleaner type signature.
- For repetitions or an exact count, e.g. `[a-z]{2}`, it would slightly improve
  type safety to make its capture type be a homogeneous tuple instead of an
  array. However, because large homogeneous tuples are difficult to work with
  and because fixed-count repetitions are syntactically very similar to
  dynamic-count repetitions which produce an array, an tuple capture may come as
  a surprise. An array on the other is a better choise for both ease of

>   use and consistency.

Reviewer 3: Do we want a note that lazy quantifiers don't affect the capture type? 

Maybe something like:
```
- Lazy quantifiers have the same capture type semantics as their greedy counterparts.
  If the first example literal from above were instead written as `([0-9a-fA-F]+)+?`,
  it would yield the same `Regex<[Substring]>` type.
```

Author: Good point.

Reviewer: Should these notes be moved to subsections of Alternatives Considered?

    .flatMap {
        switch $0 {
        case let .0(binary):
            return Int(binary, radix: 2)
        case let .1(decimal):
            return Int(decimal, radix: 10)
        case let .2(hex):
            return Int(decimal, radix: 16)
        }
    }
```

Or:

```swift
let number = line
    .firstMatch(/(?<binary>[01]+)|(?<decimal>[0-9]+)|(?<hex>[0-9A-F]+)/)?
    .captures
    .flatMap {
        switch $0 {
        case let .binary(str):
            return Int(str, radix: 2)
        case let .decimal(str):
            return Int(str, radix: 10)
        case let .hex(str):
            return Int(str, radix: 16)
        }
    }
```

In the fullness of time, we'd like to design a language feature to support this.
In the meantime, we'd like to do the best we can and leave the door open for a
source compatible migration.

With variadic generics we think we can defining the following `Alternation` type.

```swift
struct Alternation<Captures> { ... }

extension<T...> Alternation where Captures == (T...) {
    var captures: (T?...) { ... }
}
```

Which would support:

```swift
let number = line
    .firstMatch(/([01]+)|([0-9]+)|([0-9A-F]+)/)?
    .captures
    .flatMap {

>         switch $0.captures {

Author: I think we should go with `optionalProjection` as we discussed earlier, or some better name instead of `captures` for this property. Because `Alternation` is already captures. It's not immediately clear what we are doing by calling `captures` on something that already represents captures.

        case let (binary?, nil, nil):
            return Int(binary, radix: 2)
        case let (nil, decimal?, nil):
            return Int(decimal, radix: 10)
        case let (nil, nil, hex?):
            return Int(hex, radix: 16)
        default:
            fatalError("unreachable")
        }
    }
```

Or:

```swift
let number = line
    .firstMatch(/(?<binary>[01]+)|(?<decimal>[0-9]+)|(?<hex>[0-9A-F]+)/)?
    .captures
    .flatMap {
        if let binary = $0.captures.binary {
            return Int(binary, radix: 2)
        } else if let decimal = $0.captures.decimal {
            return Int(decimal, radix: 10)
        } else if let hex = $0.captures.hex {
            return Int(hex, radix: 16)
        } else {
            fatalError("unreachable")

>         }

Reviewer: We could eliminate some this `.captures` boilerplate by using `@dynamicMemberLookup` on the `Alternation` type:

```swift
if let binary = $0.binary {
    return Int(binary, radix: 2)
} else if let decimal = $0.decimal {
    return Int(decimal, radix: 10)
} else if let hex = $0.hex {
    return Int(hex, radix: 16)
} else {
    fatalError("unreachable")
}
```

Author: Added!

//     }
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`

/([0-9a-fA-F]+)?/
// => `Regex<Substring?>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Optionally {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     }
//     // `.Captures == Substring?`

/([0-9a-fA-F]+){3}/
// => `Regex<[Substring]>

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Repeat(3) {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     )
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`

/([0-9a-fA-F]+){3,5}/
// => `Regex<[Substring]>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Repeat(3...5) {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     )
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`

/([0-9a-fA-F]+){3,}/
// => `Regex<[Substring]>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Repeat(3...) {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     )
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`
```

Note that capturing collections of repeated captures like this is a departure
from most regular expression implementations, which only provide access to the
_last_ match of a repeated capture group. For example, Python only captures the
last group in this dash-separated string:

```python

> rep = re.compile(‘(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+’)
> match = rep.match(“1234-5678-9abc-def0”)
> print(match.group(1))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rep = re.compile('(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+')
match = rep.match("1234-5678-9abc-def0")
print(match.group(1))
# Prints "def0"
```

```

By contrast, the proposed Swift version captures all four sub-matches:

```swift

> // Note: Syntax / API still in discussion
> let pattern = /(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+/
> if let match = “1234-5678-9abc-def0".firstMatch(of: pattern) {
>     print(match.captures)
> }
> // Prints [“1234”, “5678", “9abc”, “def0"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let pattern = /(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+/
if let match = "1234-5678-9abc-def0".firstMatch(pattern) {
    print(match.captures)
}
// Prints ["1234", "5678", "9abc", "def0"]
```

    .firstMatch(/([01]+)|([0-9]+)|([0-9A-F]+)/)?
    .captures
    .map {
        switch $0 {
        case let .0(binary):
            return Int(binary, radix: 2)
        case let .1(decimal):
            return Int(decimal, radix: 10)
        case let .2(hex):
            return Int(decimal, radix: 16)
        }
    }

// Or with named captures:
let number = line
    .firstMatch(/(?<binary>[01]+)|(?<decimal>[0-9]+)|(?<hex>[0-9A-F]+)/)?
    .captures
    .flatMap {
        switch $0 {
        case let .binary(str):
            return Int(str, radix: 2)
        case let .decimal(str):
            return Int(str, radix: 10)
        case let .hex(str):
            return Int(str, radix: 16)
        }
    }
```

In the fullness of time, we'd like to design a language feature to support this.
In the meantime, we would like to do the best we can and leave the door open for
a source-compatible migration.

With variadic generics we think we can define the following `Alternation` type.

```swift
@dynamicMemberLookup
public struct Alternation<Captures> { ... }

extension<Option...> Alternation where Captures == (Option...) {
    public var options: (Option?...) { get }
    

>     public subscript<T>(dynamicMember keyPath: KeyPath<(T?...), T>) -> T {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public subscript<T>(dynamicMember keyPath: KeyPath<(Option?...), T>) -> T {
```

      options[keyPath: keyPath]
    }
}
```

An optional projection property, `options`, presents all options as a tuple of
optionals. The Standard Library will provide the runtime guarantee that only one
element of the `options` tuple will be non-nil. The programmer can use a
`switch` statement to pattern-match the tuple and handle each case, or directly
access the tuple's properties via key path dynamic member lookup.

```swift
let number = line
    .firstMatch(/([01]+)|([0-9]+)|([0-9A-F]+)/)?
    .captures

>     .map {

Reviewer: These were `flatMap` because `Int(_:radix:)` returns an `Int?`, so using just `map` on an `Optional` results in `Int??`

Author: Ah, I had assume `init(_:radix:)` returned an non-optional. Didn't look it up.

`Substring` and reduce allocations.

```swift
let regex = /([a-z])+/
// => `Regex<CaptureCollection<Substring>>`

// `CaptureCollection` implemented as... 
public struct CaptureCollection<Captures>: BidirectionalCollection {
    private var ranges: [ClosedRange<String.Index>]
    ...
}
```

However, we believe the use of arrays in capture types would make a much cleaner
type signature.
  
### Homogeneous tuples for exact-count quantification

For exact-count quantifications, e.g. `[a-z]{5}`, it would slightly improve
type safety to make its capture type be a homogeneous tuple instead of an array,
e.g. `(5 x Substring)` as pitched in [Improved Compiler Support for Large Homogenous Tuples](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-improved-compiler-support-for-large-homogenous-tuples/49023).

```swift
/[a-z]{5}/     // => Regex<(5 x Substring)> (exact count)
/[a-z]{5, 8}/  // => Regex<[Substring]>     (bounded count) 
/[a-z]{5,}/    // => Regex<[Substring]>     (lower-bounded count)
```

However, this would cause an inconsistency between exact-count quantification
and bounded quantification.  We believe that the proposed design will result in

> much less surprises as we associate the `{...}` quantifier syntax with `Array`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fewer surprises as we associate the `{...}` quantifier syntax with `Array`.
```

capture type is an `Alternation` that's generic over each option's underlying
pattern.

```swift
/([01]+)|[0-9]+|([0-9A-F]+)/
// => `Regex<Alternation<(Substring, Void, Substring)>>`
```

If there are no capturing groups within an alternation the resulting capture
type is `Void`.

```swift
/[01]+|[0-9]+|[0-9A-F]+/
// => `Regex<Void>`
```

Nested captures follow the algebra previously described.

```swift
/([01]+|[0-9]+|[0-9A-F]+)/
// => `Regex<Substring>`
/(([01]+)|([0-9]+)|([0-9A-F]+))/
// => `Regex<(Substring, Alternation<(Substring, Substring, Substring))>>`
/(?<overall>(?<binary>[01]+)|(?<decimal>[0-9]+)|(?<hex>[0-9A-F]+))/
// => `Regex<(overall: Substring, Alternation<(binary: Substring, decimal: Substring, hex: Substring))>>`
```

At the use site, `Alternation` behaves like an `enum`. Ideally you should be
able to exhaustively switch over all the captures.

```swift
let number = line
    .firstMatch(/([01]+)|([0-9]+)|([0-9A-F]+)/)?
    .captures
    .flatMap {
        switch $0 {
        case let .0(binary):
            return Int(binary, radix: 2)
        case let .1(decimal):
            return Int(decimal, radix: 10)
        case let .2(hex):

>             return Int(decimal, radix: 16)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            return Int(hex, radix: 16)
```

            - [Quantification](#quantification)
            - [Alternation](#alternation)
    - [Effect on ABI stability](#effect-on-abi-stability)
    - [Effect on API resilience](#effect-on-api-resilience)
    - [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
        - [Lazy collections instead of arrays of substrings](#lazy-collections-instead-of-arrays-of-substrings)
        - [Homogeneous tuples for exact-count quantification](#homogeneous-tuples-for-exact-count-quantification)
        - [`Never` as empty capture instead of `Void`](#never-as-empty-capture-instead-of-void)
    - [Future directions](#future-directions)
        - [Dynamic captures](#dynamic-captures)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

## Introduction

Capturing groups are a commonly used component of regular expressions as they
allow the programmer to extract information from matched input. A capturing
group collects multiple characters together as a single unit that can be
[backreferenced](https://www.regular-expressions.info/backref.html) within the
regular expression and accessed in the result of a successful match. For
example, the following regular expression contains the capturing groups `(cd*)`
and `(ef)`.

> 

Author: I have the following paragraph in the beginning of the pitch:

> This focus of this pitch is the structural properties of capture types and how
> regular expression patterns compose to form new capture types. The semantics of
> string matching, its effect on the capture types (i.e. `UnicodeScalarView` or
> `Substring`), or the matching API will be discussed in a separate pitch.

I'll mention the result builder DSL here, too.

```swift
// Literal version.
let regex = /ab(cd*)(ef)gh/

> // => `Regex<(Substring, Substring)>`

Author: I'm pretty sure we don't have to store `Substring` or any other views in the implementation. It can be all ranges until the point `.captures` is called to access the captures.

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let regex = Regex {
//         "ab"
//         Regex {
//             "c"
//             Repeat("d")
//         }.capture()
//         "ef".capture()
//         "gh"
//     }

> if let match = "abcddddefgh".firstMatch(regex) {

Author: See https://github.com/apple/swift-experimental-string-processing/pull/35#discussion_r743879343

> if let match = "abcddddefgh".firstMatch(regex) {

Reviewer: After further discussion, I do think we're going to elaborate on the type signature for firstMatch in this proposal.

> if let match = "abcddddefgh".firstMatch(regex) {

Author: Resolved in Kyle's commit 44186a7.

over an unconstrained generic parameter `Captures`. Upon a regex match, the
captured value is available in type `Captures` in the match result.

```swift
public struct Regex<Captures>: RegexProtocol, ExpressibleByRegexLiteral {
    ...
}
```

### Capture type

In this section, we dive into capture types for regular expression patterns and
how they compose.

By default, a regular expression literal has type `Regex`. Its generic argument
`Capture` is its capture type.

#### Basics

Regular expressions without any capturing groups have type `Regex<Void>`, for example:

```swift
let identifier = /[_a-zA-Z]+[_a-zA-Z0-9]*/  // => `Regex<Void>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let identifier = Regex {
//         OneOrMore(/[_a-zA-Z]/)
//         Repeat(/[_a-zA-Z0-9]/)
//     } // => `Regex<Void>`
```

#### Capturing group

In regular expression literals, a capturing group is a pattern wrapped by a pair
of parentheses. A capturing group's capture type is reflected in the result
type's `Capture` generic argument. A capturing group's corresponding capture type
is `Substring`.

```
pattern ::= '(' pattern ')'

> ```

Author: Now that I think about it, the grammar could have been included in the regex literals pitch. Is there a reason that was not included?

> ```

Reviewer 4: We needed to get the pitch out quickly, and the full grammar is actually pretty massive. It sufficed to say "interior syntax is PCRE" and vaguely imply we're also unioned with UTS18, ICU, and perhaps Oniguruma. We do need a followup or a second draft though.

> ```

Author: Removed formal grammar as suggested.

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)/ // => `Regex<Substring>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent
//     let graphemeBreakLowerBound = OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()

> //     // `.Captures == Substring`

Author: Result builder types won't return a `Regex`. They are their own types conforming to `RegexProtocol`.

has a capture; otherwise, the resulting capture type is a tuple of capture types
of all patterns that have a capture.

```
pattern ::= pattern pattern
```

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)\.\.[0-9a-fA-F]+/
// => `Regex<Substring>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let graphemeBreakLowerBound = Regex {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//         ".."
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit)
//     }
//     // `.Captures == Substring`

let graphemeBreakRange = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)\.\.([0-9a-fA-F]+)/
// => `Regex<(Substring, Substring)>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let graphemeBreakRange = Regex {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//         ".."
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     }
//     // `.Captures == (Substring, Substring)`
```

#### Named capturing group

A named capturing group in a pattern with multiple captures causes the resulting
tuple to have a tuple element label at the corresponding capture type position.
When the pattern has only one capture, there will be no tuple element label

> because there are no 1-element tuples.

Author: It is discussed as the future directions section.

```
pattern ::= '(' '?' '<' name '>' pattern ')'
```

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /(?<lower>[0-9A-F]+)\.\.[0-9A-F]+/
// => `Regex<Substring>`

let graphemeBreakRange = /(?<lower>[0-9A-F]+)\.\.(?<upper>[0-9A-F]+)/
// => `Regex<(lower: Substring, upper: Substring)>`
```

#### Non-capturing group

> A non-capturing group's capture type is the capture type of its underlying pattern.

Author: Reworded:
> A non-capturing group's capture type is the capture type of its underlying
> pattern. That is, it does not capture anything by itself, but transparently
> propagate its underlying pattern's captures.

a quantifier, as denoted by a `?` suffix, does not affect the capture type. 

```
pattern ::= pattern '*' '?'?
pattern ::= pattern '+' '?'?
pattern ::= pattern '?' '?'?
pattern ::= pattern '{' number (',' spaces? number?)? '}' '?'?
```

| Syntax               | Description           | Capture type                                                  |
| -------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `*` / `*?`           | 0 or more             | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |
| `+` / `+?`           | 1 or more             | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |
| `?` / `??`           | 0 or 1                | `Optional` of the sub-pattern capture type                    |
| `{n}` / `{n}?`       | Exactly _n_           | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |
| `{n, m}` / `{n, m}?` | Between _n_ and _m_   | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |
| `{n,}` / `{n,}?`     | _n_ or more           | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |

> 

Author: Hmm here I just wanted to give a clear association between the syntax and the corresponding typing.

> 

Reviewer: I think Michael's saying the addition of the lazy quantifiers is really emphasizing the regex syntax. It might be just as clear if in the table we omit the lazy quantifier variants.

> 

Author: Removed syntax details as suggested.

/([0-9a-fA-F]+){3,5}/
// => `Regex<[Substring]>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Repeat(3...5) {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     )
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`

/([0-9a-fA-F]+){3,}/
// => `Regex<[Substring]>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     Repeat(3...) {
//         OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
//     )
//     // `.Captures == [Substring]`
```

Note that capturing collections of repeated captures like this is a departure
from most regular expression implementations, which only provide access to the
_last_ match of a repeated capture group. For example, Python only captures the
last group in this dash-separated string:

```python
rep = re.compile('(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+')
match = rep.match("1234-5678-9abc-def0")
print(match.group(1))
# Prints "def0"
```

By contrast, the proposed Swift version captures all four sub-matches:

```swift
let pattern = /(?:([0-9a-f]+)-?)+/
if let match = “1234-5678-9abc-def0".firstMatch(of: pattern) {
    print(match.captures)
}
// Prints [“1234”, “5678", “9abc”, “def0"]
```

Despite the deviation from prior art, we believe that the proposed capture

> behavior leads to better consistency with the meaning of these quantifiers.

Reviewer 4: But we can also provide a compatibility projection. BTW, do we know why they only provide the last one? Do we want that kind of memory savings or does that simplify our execution strategy?

Author: I added a paragraph about adding a variant of quantifiers for smaller memory footprint as a future direction. d8ccc63

#### Alternation

Alternations are used to match one of multiple possible patterns.

```txt
pattern ::= pattern '|' pattern
```

If there are one or more capturing groups within an alternation, the resulting
capture type is an `Alternation` that's generic over each option's underlying
pattern.

```swift
/([01]+)|[0-9]+|([0-9A-F]+)/
// => `Regex<Alternation<(Substring, Void, Substring)>>`
```

If there are no capturing groups within an alternation the resulting capture
type is `Void`.

```swift
/[01]+|[0-9]+|[0-9A-F]+/
// => `Regex<Void>`
```

Nested captures follow the algebra previously described.

```swift
/([01]+|[0-9]+|[0-9A-F]+)/
// => `Regex<Substring>`
/(([01]+)|([0-9]+)|([0-9A-F]+))/
// => `Regex<(Substring, Alternation<(Substring, Substring, Substring))>>`
/(?<overall>(?<binary>[01]+)|(?<decimal>[0-9]+)|(?<hex>[0-9A-F]+))/

> // => `Regex<(overall: Substring, Alternation<(binary: Substring, decimal: Substring, hex: Substring))>>`

Reviewer 4: I suspect the name `Alternation` won't survive the first 5 posts in the discussion.

Reviewer: `Alternation` was used in the result builder syntax in the overview pitch. In that thread, someone suggested `OneOf` instead. Though there's probably needs to be a difference between the type that represents the capture and the type to create the scoped alternation in the result builder.

Author: Current I'm distinguishing between the builder type and the match result by scoping: `Alternation` and `RegexMatch.Alternation`.  But I think `OneOf` is a better name for the DSL, so I'm leaving the match result type as `Alternation` for now.

capture type based on the regular expression's content.  Same for the result
builder syntax, except that the type inference rules are expressed as method
declarations in the result builder type.

## Detailed design

### `Regex` type

`Regex` is a structure that represents a regular expression. `Regex` is generic
over an unconstrained generic parameter `Captures`. Upon a regex match, the
captured value is available in type `Captures` in the match result.

```swift
public struct Regex<Captures>: RegexProtocol, ExpressibleByRegexLiteral {
    ...
}
```

### Capture type

In this section, we dive into capture types for regular expression patterns and
how they compose.

By default, a regular expression literal has type `Regex`. Its generic argument
`Capture` is its capture type.

#### Basics

Regular expressions without any capturing groups have type `Regex<Void>`, for example:

```swift
let identifier = /[_a-zA-Z]+[_a-zA-Z0-9]*/  // => `Regex<Void>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent:
//     let identifier = Regex {
//         OneOrMore(/[_a-zA-Z]/)
//         Repeat(/[_a-zA-Z0-9]/)
//     } // => `Regex<Void>`
```

> #### Capturing group
> 
> In regular expression literals, a capturing group is a pattern wrapped by a pair
> of parentheses. A capturing group's capture type is reflected in the result
> type's `Capture` generic argument. A capturing group's corresponding capture type
> is `Substring`.
> 
> ```
> pattern ::= '(' pattern ')'
> ```
> 
> ```swift
> let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)/ // => `Regex<Substring>`
> 
> // Result builder DSL equivalent
> //     let graphemeBreakLowerBound = OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
> //     // `.Captures == Substring`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Capturing group: `(...)`

In regular expression literals, a capturing group saves the portion of the input matched by its contained regex. A capturing group's `Capture` type is `Substring`.

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)/ // => `Regex<Substring>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent
//     let graphemeBreakLowerBound = OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
```

```

> 

Reviewer 4: How do you feel about this alternate formulation? (rendered version of above commit suggestion)

#### Capturing group: `(...)`

In regular expression literals, a capturing group saves the portion of the input matched by its contained regex. A capturing group's `Capture` type is `Substring`.

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)/ // => `Regex<Substring>`

// Result builder DSL equivalent
//     let graphemeBreakLowerBound = OneOrMore(CharacterClass.hexDigit).capture()
```

Author: Good suggestion!  I'll update it.

Author: Updated as suggested.  I initially thought about using `(...)` earlier but I didn't because it could be confused with the `.` metacharacter. Formal grammar probably is the clearest way to describe it. Nonetheless, I agree `(...)` helps reduce the emphasis on syntax.

// ("007F..009F", "007F", "..009F", "009F", "Control")
```

#### Quantification

A quantifier's capture type depends on its underlying pattern. The laziness of
a quantifier, as denoted by a `?` suffix, does not affect the capture type. 

```
pattern ::= pattern '*' '?'?
pattern ::= pattern '+' '?'?
pattern ::= pattern '?' '?'?
pattern ::= pattern '{' number (',' spaces? number?)? '}' '?'?
```

| Syntax               | Description           | Capture type                                                  |
| -------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `*` / `*?`           | 0 or more             | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |
| `+` / `+?`           | 1 or more             | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |
| `?` / `??`           | 0 or 1                | `Optional` of the sub-pattern capture type                    |
| `{n}` / `{n}?`       | Exactly _n_           | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |
| `{n, m}` / `{n, m}?` | Between _n_ and _m_   | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |

> | `{n,}` / `{n,}?`     | _n_ or more           | `Array` of the sub-pattern capture type                       |

Reviewer 4: Quantification is more complex if we're talking about syntax or capabilities (e.g. possessive quantification, whether `{n}?` means anything anymore, etc.). The key point is that all of this is entirely irrelevant to this pitch.

---

#### Quantification: `*`, `+`, `?`, `{n}`, `{n,}`, `{n,m}`

A quantifier wraps its underlying pattern's capture type in either an `Optional` or `Array`. Zero-or-one quantification (`?`) produces an `Optional` and all others produce an `Array`. The kind of quantification, i.e. greedy vs reluctant vs possessive, is irrelevant to determining the capture type.

...

Reviewer 4: FWIW, the token representation from my [draft](https://github.com/apple/swift-experimental-string-processing/pull/40/files#diff-21e1fabf61ddc50761ff35e58d9df816058df5224058a64ffb93ad4f7ae7c58cR162):

```swift
  enum Quantifier {
    case zeroOrMore(Kind)   // *,     *?,     *+
    case oneOrMore(Kind)    // +,     +?,     ++
    case zeroOrOne(Kind)    // ?,     ??,     ?+
    case exactly(Int, Kind) // {n},   {n}?,   {n}+
    case nOrMore(Int, Kind) // {n,},  {n,}?,  {n,}+
    case upToN(Int, Kind)   // {,n},  {,n}?,  {,n}+
    case range(             // {n,m}, {n,m}?, {n,m}+
      atLeast: Int, atMost: Int, Kind)

    enum Kind {
      case greedy     //
      case reluctant  // ?
      case possessive // +
    }
  }
```

PCRE doesn't have `{,n}`, and reluctant or possessive quantification with `{n}` and variants gets weird pretty quickly. [Oniguruma](https://github.com/kkos/oniguruma/blob/master/doc/RE#L154) doesn't typically support `{n}?` as meaning reluctant, as that's kinda meaningless, unless you specify/configure with `ONIG_SYNTAX_JAVA` or `ONIG_SYNTAX_PERL`. Otherwise, the `?` changes meaning from reluctant to zero-or-one. Similarly for some of the possessives.

We really don't want to wade into this in this pitch :-). CC @hamishknight

Author: Updated as suggested.

```swift
let graphemeBreakLowerBound = /([0-9a-fA-F]+)/ // => `Regex<Substring>`

> // Equivalent result builder syntax:

Author: I know that this should be pretty clear to the reader, but this one is not really using the result builder syntax...  That's why I was using "DSL" to refer to anything that involves types like `OneOrMore`.
